Add Seqera Platform Automation side quest (#968)
nextflow-io/training: docs/en/docs/side_quests/platform_automation/index.md

# Seqera Platform Automation

> The Seqera Platform does not run your work. It is an API and a control plane over your cloud. It hands jobs to a compute environment, the compute environment runs them on cloud VMs, and the Platform reads back state, logs, and exit codes.

Reviewer: Repo convention is one sentence per line (cleaner diffs). This paragraph (and most prose in the file) packs several per line. Not blocking, but worth a reflow pass. Example:

```suggestion
The Seqera Platform does not run your work.
It is an API and a control plane over your cloud.
It hands jobs to a compute environment, the compute environment runs them on cloud VMs, and the Platform reads back state, logs, and exit codes.
```

- Create a compute environment two ways, with increasing control over the cloud: the UI (Batch Forge) and Terraform
- Add a pipeline to the Launchpad declaratively with Terraform, and see idempotency
- Launch a pipeline using the GUI, CLI and `seqerakit`.
- Tell declarative existence (Terraform) apart from imperative actions (the UI, `seqerakit`, `tw`) and learn when to use each

### Prerequisites

Before taking on this side quest, you should:

- Have a Seqera Platform account on Seqera Cloud [https://cloud.seqera.io](`https://cloud.seqera.io`), or an Enterprise install
- Be a member of a workspace with a role: Admin, Maintain, or Launch
- Have credentials for your cloud provider already added to that workspace (not covered here, see [credentials overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-cloud/credentials/overview))
- Ideally, GitHub credentials are added to your workspace. This is optional, but it would help prevent incidents caused by GitHub rate limits.
- Be comfortable with the command line and basic Nextflow concepts

---

## 0. Get started

### Open the training codespace

> The Codespace contains all the tools you need (Terraform, `tw`, `seqerakit`); you

Reviewer: Worth a caveat: "you install nothing yourself" only holds once `ghcr.io/nextflow-io/training:latest` is rebuilt from the updated dev devcontainer (which adds the `terraform`, `seqera-cli`, and `uv-tools` features). The production `.devcontainer/devcontainer.json` pulls the prebuilt image and adds no `features`, so until that image is rebuilt the Codespace has none of these tools. I confirmed today's `:latest` ships without `terraform`/`tw`/`seqerakit`. Probably a merge-order / image-rebuild coordination note.

    │       ├── main.tf
    │       ├── variables.tf
    │       └── terraform.tfvars.example
    └── seqerakit              # sections 2 & 3: add and launch a pipeline
        ├── add-rnaseq.yml
        ├── launch-rnaseq.yml
        └── launch-rnaseq-multiple.yml
    ```

### Create an access token

We authenticate to the Platform to tell it who we are. That is what grants the permissions of our role. Seqera uses a **personal access token**: a bearer token you create once and send with every API call, in an `Authorization: Bearer <token>` header. The token carries your identity and role, so the Platform knows who you are and what you can do. Anyone with the token can act as you, so keep it secret. In this training we save it as an environment variable.

1. In the Platform, open the user menu (top right) and choose **Your tokens**.
2. Click **Add token**, name it (e.g. `platform-automation`), and click **Add**.
3. Copy the token now. The Platform shows it only once.
4. In the Codespace terminal, export it under both names:

```bash
export TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN=<paste-token>
export SEQERA_ACCESS_TOKEN=$TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN
```

> Terraform, `tw`, and `seqerakit` all read the token from these variables. Check it worked:

Reviewer: `SEQERA_ACCESS_TOKEN` looks unused by anything in this quest. Both `terraform/*/main.tf` headers say the `seqera` provider reads `TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN` from the env, and `tw`/`seqerakit` use `TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN` too. Either drop `SEQERA_ACCESS_TOKEN`, or state which tool needs it. As written, "all read the token from these variables" isn't quite accurate.

```bash
tw info
```

This prints the API endpoint and the authenticated user. If it errors, the token is wrong or not exported.

!!! warning

    This only exists in a single terminal session, if you open a new terminal you will need to export them again.

> For Seqera Enterprise, also set `SEQERA_API_URL` (and the `server_url` Terraform variable) to your install's API URL. Everything else is identical.

Reviewer: Double-check the variable name here: `tw` (and therefore `seqerakit`) read the Enterprise endpoint from `TOWER_API_ENDPOINT`, not `SEQERA_API_URL`. The Terraform `server_url` variable is correct. Worth being precise so Enterprise users don't set a var nothing reads.

| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| [Admin](#1-admin-compute-environments-and-cloud)        | Owner / Admin | Compute environments and cloud resources | a `compute_env_id`   |
| [Maintain](#2-maintain-add-a-pipeline-to-the-launchpad) | Maintain      | Pipelines on the Launchpad               | a Launchpad pipeline |
| [Launch](#3-launch-run-a-pipeline)                      | Launch        | Nothing; can only run                    | pipeline runs        |

Admin users create compute environments and assign roles to everyone else. If you only have Maintain, an Admin on your team hands you a `compute_env_id`; start at section 2. If you only have Launch, they hand you a Launchpad pipeline (and optionally an Action) to run; start at section 3. Each section opens with what it requires.

---

## 1. Admin: compute environments and cloud

**Requires:** Owner or Admin role, and permissions in the cloud environment. If you are using a Cloud provider, authenticate with them first via their CLI (e.g. `aws sso login`).

> The same compute environment can be created with increasing control over the cloud. We build it two ways.

Reviewer: Small voice nudge toward the second person the other quests use ("you'll build", not "we build").

```suggestion
The same compute environment can be created with increasing control over the cloud. You'll build it two ways.
```

### 1.1. Click-ops a compute environment with Batch Forge

Batch Forge is the hands-off option: the Platform reaches into your cloud and creates the resources for you. Most convenient, least control.

In the side bar, open **Compute Environments** and click **Create compute environment**. Give it a name, pick your cloud platform, and select the credentials for that cloud. The rest of the form differs by provider; recommended settings:

> **AWS**

Reviewer: 1.1 walks both AWS and Azure, but everything after it (the 1.2 export example, the 1.3 Terraform, and the `az://work` work-dir throughout 2-3) is Azure-only. An AWS learner who follows 1.1 hits a wall at 1.3 with no path forward. Either say up front "the rest of this quest assumes Azure Batch" or note where AWS users diverge.

That convenience is the trade-off: Forge owns those resources and gives you little control. A lab that already runs on managed infrastructure wants the opposite, to describe the resources itself and wire the Platform to them. That is the Terraform path.

### 1.2. Read it back over the API with `tw`

The form you just filled in did nothing special: it sent a configuration to the Platform API.
Ask the API for what you made, from the terminal, with nothing retyped.

`tw` reads the same workspace the UI does. List the compute environments and the one you created in 1.1 is there:

```bash
tw compute-envs list
```

Now export its full configuration to a file.
Use the name you gave it in 1.1:

```bash
tw compute-envs export forge-ce.json --name="<the name you gave it in 1.1>"
```

`tw` reads the workspace from `TOWER_WORKSPACE_ID` (set in section 0), so no `--workspace` flag is needed.
The file `forge-ce.json` is the compute environment as the API stores it:

```json title="forge-ce.json"
{
  "computeEnv": {
    "name": "azure-batch",

>     "platform": "azure-batch",
>     "config": {
>       "workDir": "az://work",
>       "region": "eastus",
>       "waveEnabled": true,
>       "fusion2Enabled": true,
>       "forge": {
>         "headPool": {
>           "vmType": "Standard_D2s_v3",
>           "vmCount": 1,
>           "autoScale": true
>         },
>         "workerPool": {
>           "vmType": "Standard_D4s_v3",
>           "vmCount": 4,
>           "autoScale": true
>         },
>         "disposeOnDeletion": true
>       }
>     }
>   }
> }
> ```

Reviewer: `tw compute-envs export` (0.32.0) does not emit a `computeEnv`/`config` wrapper. The real output is a flat object keyed by `discriminator`, with the config fields hoisted to the top level. I ran this against an Azure Batch Forge CE and got the shape below. The actual file also carries default/null fields (`deleteJobsOnCompletion`, `managedIdentityClientId`, `labels`, ...) that aren't worth showing here. The `forge` block survives, so the prose still lands.

````suggestion
```json title="forge-ce.json" hl_lines="2 7"
{
  "discriminator": "azure-batch",
  "region": "eastus",
  "workDir": "az://work",
  "waveEnabled": true,
  "fusion2Enabled": true,
  "forge": {
    "headPool": { "vmType": "Standard_D2s_v3", "vmCount": 1, "autoScale": true },
    "workerPool": { "vmType": "Standard_D4s_v3", "vmCount": 4, "autoScale": true },
    "disposeOnDeletion": true,
    "dualPoolConfig": true
  }
}
```
````

```bash
tw compute-envs import forge-ce.json --name="azure-batch-copy" --credentials="<your-azure-credentials-name>"
```

### 1.3. Provision the cloud with Terraform

Terraform manages cloud resources declaratively: you describe what should exist and Terraform makes it so. It does not run your work; it only creates the compute environment. `side-quests/platform_automation/terraform/compute-env/` does it in a single `main.tf`, two providers in one apply:

- data sources: the existing Batch account and the Azure credentials already
  stored in the Platform, referenced, not created.
- `azurerm`: creates a head pool and a worker pool on that account.
- `seqera`: creates the compute environment pointing at those pools.

The manual marker: `head_pool` is set to the pool Terraform just made and there is **no `forge` block**. That one difference is what makes the compute environment manual instead of Forge. `nextflow_config` routes tasks to the worker pool.

> Let's walk the key blocks of `terraform/compute-env/main.tf`.

Reviewer: The other quests never narrate eight code blocks before the learner runs anything; they run early and explain against real output. Reframe the lead-in so the providers/locals/pools read as reference and the focus lands on the one block that encodes the lesson. (See the review summary for the fuller plan-first restructure: `init` + `plan` once `terraform.tfvars` is filled, then collapse the boilerplate into a `??? abstract`.)

```suggestion
The whole file is in the repo to read at your own pace, and most of it is standard Terraform: the providers, the locals, and the two Azure Batch pools. Only one block encodes the lesson that makes this compute environment _manual_, so we'll focus there and treat the rest as reference.
```

The first block declares the providers and pins their versions. The `seqera` provider is pinned to exactly `0.40.1`:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: Title the excerpt and highlight the pinned `seqera` provider line the prose calls out.

````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf" hl_lines="5"
````

terraform {
  required_version = ">= 1.9"

  required_providers {
    seqera  = { source = "seqeralabs/seqera", version = "0.40.1" }
    azurerm = { source = "hashicorp/azurerm", version = ">= 3.0" }
    random  = { source = "hashicorp/random", version = ">= 3.0" }
  }
}
```

Next we configure the providers. The `seqera` provider reads `TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN` from the environment, so there is no token argument here:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf"
````

provider "azurerm" {
  features {}
  subscription_id = var.subscription_id
}

provider "seqera" {
  server_url = var.server_url
}
```

Next we can define some variables we can use throughout our deployment. In this case, we will set the node sizes and details once and reuse them throughout the configuration:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: Highlight the VM sizes, since the surrounding text is about node sizing.

````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf" hl_lines="2 3"
````

locals {
  head_vm_size      = "Standard_E4ds_v5"
  worker_vm_size    = "Standard_E16ds_v5"
  worker_max_nodes  = 8
  node_agent_sku_id = "batch.node.ubuntu 24.04"

  # The Platform requires a pool's task slots to equal the node's vCPU count.
  # Azure VM size names embed that count (Standard_E16ds_v5 -> 16), so derive it
  # from the size rather than hardcoding a number that can drift out of sync.
  head_vm_cores   = tonumber(regex("^Standard_[A-Z]+([0-9]+)", local.head_vm_size)[0])
  worker_vm_cores = tonumber(regex("^Standard_[A-Z]+([0-9]+)", local.worker_vm_size)[0])
}
```

Next we can refer to resources that already exist. These are called `data` in Terraform. Here we refer to the Azure Batch account:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf"
````

# Existing Azure resources the customer owns. Referenced, not managed.
data "azurerm_batch_account" "existing" {
  name                = var.batch_account_name
  resource_group_name = var.batch_account_rg
}
```

Now the resources Terraform does create. The pool names must stay unique across re-creates, so we first generate a short random suffix to append to them:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf"
````

# Keeps pool names unique across re-creates.
resource "random_string" "suffix" {
  length  = 6
  special = false
  upper   = false
}
```

Then the node pools themselves. Terraform creates two pools in Azure Batch with the `azurerm_batch_pool` resource. You can add as many as you like, but the details must match the values the Azure provider expects. Here we start a fixed-size head pool and a dynamically sized worker pool:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf"
````

  }

  storage_image_reference {
    publisher = "microsoft-dsvm"
    offer     = "ubuntu-hpc"
    sku       = "2404"
    version   = "latest"
  }

  container_configuration {
    type = "DockerCompatible"
  }

  # Terraform manages the pool, not its live scale.
  lifecycle {
    ignore_changes = [auto_scale, fixed_scale]
  }
}
```

Each pool in `main.tf` also carries a `start_task` (elided above) that runs once per node at startup. Forge adds an equivalent task to the pools it creates; manual pools get nothing, so we replicate the essential parts: install `azcopy` (Nextflow's Azure Batch executor uses it to stage data) and register the AppArmor profile Fusion needs on Ubuntu 24.04 nodes. See the `node_start_task_script` local in the file for the full script.

Once we've built the Azure Batch node pools, we add the Seqera Platform compute environment that points to them. The compute environment needs Azure credentials to talk to your cloud. We added those to the workspace earlier (see Prerequisites), so we look them up by name rather than storing keys here. The `seqera_credentials` data source lists the credentials in the workspace, and we pick out the one whose name matches:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf"
````

# Azure credentials already stored in the Platform, looked up by name.
data "seqera_credentials" "all" {
  workspace_id = var.workspace_id
}

locals {
  azure_credentials_id = one([
    for c in data.seqera_credentials.all.credentials : c.id
    if c.name == var.azure_credential_name
  ])
}
```

Finally, the compute environment itself. This is the manual marker in code: `head_pool` points at the pool we just created and `nextflow_config` routes tasks to the worker pool's queue. `enable_wave` and `enable_fusion` turn on Wave (container provisioning) and the Fusion file system, the same checkboxes you would tick in the UI; with Fusion enabled, Wave must be too. Because it references `azurerm_batch_pool.head.name` and `azurerm_batch_pool.worker.name`, Terraform knows to create the pools first:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: This is the single most important highlight in the lesson: `head_pool` set + no `forge` block is the "manual" marker the prose keeps referring to. Highlight `head_pool` and `nextflow_config` so the reader's eye lands on it.

````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf" hl_lines="14 17"
````

resource "seqera_compute_env" "main" {
  workspace_id = var.workspace_id

  compute_env = {
    name           = "azure-batch-manual"
    description    = "Azure Batch CE on Terraform-managed pools"
    platform       = "azure-batch"
    credentials_id = local.azure_credentials_id

    config = {
      azure_batch = {
        region          = var.region
        work_dir        = var.work_dir
        head_pool       = azurerm_batch_pool.head.name
        enable_wave     = true
        enable_fusion   = true
        nextflow_config = "process.queue = '${azurerm_batch_pool.worker.name}'\n"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The last block is the output the next tier needs:

> ```terraform

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```terraform title="terraform/compute-env/main.tf"
````

You add the same pipeline, `rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER`, four ways. The first three are imperative, you run a command and it acts. The last, Terraform, is declarative. Watch what happens when you run each one twice.

### 2.1. Add a pipeline via the UI

In the workspace, open the **Launchpad** and click **Add pipeline**. Fill in the form:

- **Name**: `rnaseq-nf-` followed by your handle, e.g. `rnaseq-nf-ada` (the handle you exported as `WORKSHOP_USER` in section 0).
- **Compute environment**: the one from section 1, e.g. `azure-batch-manual`.
- **Pipeline to launch**: `https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf`.
- **Revision**: `master`.
- **Work directory**: your Azure Blob work dir, e.g. `az://work`.

Click **Add**. The pipeline appears on the Launchpad with no run started. Adding a pipeline only saves a launch configuration; it does not run anything.

To remove from the workspace, you can click the hamburger menu on the top right and click **Delete**.

### 2.2. Add a pipeline via `tw`

The CLI does the same thing in one command:

```bash
tw pipelines add \

>   --name="rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER" \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --name="rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER-tw" \
```

prevent clash with manual creation

  --compute-env="azure-batch-manual" \
  --work-dir="az://work" \
  --revision="master" \
  https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf
```

Run it again and `tw` errors: a pipeline with that name already exists. The command is imperative, so each invocation tries to add a pipeline; it has no notion of "already in the desired state".

To remove the pipeline, you can use the `tw` command line again:

```bash
tw pipelines delete --name="rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER"
```

> ### 2.3. Add a pipeline with `seqerakit`

Reviewer: Is it even worth teaching `seqerakit` with the Terraform provider available now?

`seqerakit` is a wrapper over `tw` that reads a YAML file and runs the underlying `tw` commands. It keeps the configuration as code, so a teammate can reproduce the exact same pipeline. `seqerakit/add-rnaseq.yml` describes the pipeline:

> ```yaml

Reviewer: Title it and highlight the two fields a learner actually edits (the unique name and the compute environment).

````suggestion
```yaml title="seqerakit/add-rnaseq.yml" hl_lines="2 6"
````

pipelines:

>   - name: "rnaseq-nf-${WORKSHOP_USER}"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: "rnaseq-nf-${WORKSHOP_USER}-sk"
```

Prevent clashes

    url: "https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf"
    workspace: "${TOWER_WORKSPACE_ID}"
    description: "Added with seqerakit"

>     compute-env: "azure-batch-manual"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    compute-env: "<CE name>"
```

unless guaranteed

    work-dir: "az://work"
    revision: "master"
```

`seqerakit` expands variables like `${TOWER_WORKSPACE_ID}` and `${WORKSHOP_USER}` from the environment. Both were set in section 0, so just add the pipeline:

```bash
cd /workspaces/training/side-quests/platform_automation/seqerakit
seqerakit add-rnaseq.yml
```

If you run it again, it errors, the same way `tw` did, because the pipeline already exists:

```console
The pipelines resource already exists and will not be created. Please set 'on_exists: overwrite' to replace the resource or set 'on_exists: ignore' to ignore this error.

> ```

Reviewer: The other quests wrap expected output in collapsible `??? success`/`??? failure "Command output"` blocks so the page stays scannable and learners can self-check. This one is an error, so `failure`.

````suggestion
??? failure "Command output"

    ```console
    The pipelines resource already exists and will not be created. Please set 'on_exists: overwrite' to replace the resource or set 'on_exists: ignore' to ignore this error.
    ```
````

You can force it through with `seqerakit add-rnaseq.yml --overwrite`, which deletes and recreates the pipeline. But that is you telling it to repeat the action. By default, adding twice is an error. To make "add once, and leave it alone after that" the _default_ behaviour, we need a tool that manages existence rather than actions: Terraform.

### 2.4. Add a pipeline with Terraform

`side-quests/platform_automation/terraform/pipeline` adds the same pipeline declaratively. You describe the pipeline that should exist; Terraform makes the workspace match. Like the imperative methods above, the config tracks the `master` branch; you will pin it to a release tag below to see Terraform update the pipeline in place.

```bash

> cd /workspaces/training/side-quests/platform_automation/terraform/pipeline

Reviewer: Not sure why, but I can't make this work

```
seqera_pipeline.rnaseq_nf: Creating...
╷
│ Error: unexpected response from API. Got an unexpected response code 403
│ 
│   with seqera_pipeline.rnaseq_nf,
│   on main.tf line 27, in resource "seqera_pipeline" "rnaseq_nf":
│   27: resource "seqera_pipeline" "rnaseq_nf" {
│ 
│ **Request**:
│ POST /pipelines?workspaceId=75541431575041 HTTP/1.1
│ Host: api.cloud.seqera.io
│ Accept: application/json
│ Authorization: (sensitive)
│ Content-Type: application/json
│ User-Agent: speakeasy-sdk/terraform 0.40.1 2.903.0 1.153.0
│ github.com/seqeralabs/terraform-provider-seqera/internal/sdk
│ 
│ 
│ **Response**:
│ HTTP/2.0 403 Forbidden
│ Content-Length: 0
│ Date: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 15:28:47 GMT
│ 
│ 
```

terraform init
terraform apply -var="username=$WORKSHOP_USER" -var="workspace_id=<ID>" -var="compute_env_id=<CE_ID>"
```

!!! tip

    Copy `terraform.tfvars.example` to `terraform.tfvars` and fill it in so you stop passing `-var` flags.

> Open the Launchpad: `rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER` is there, with no run. Now apply again:

Reviewer: Section 1.2/1.4 read the compute environment back over the API; mirror that here so the learner *watches* the Launchpad pipeline appear (the artifact handed to the Launch tier), instead of only being told it's there.

````suggestion
Confirm it landed, in the UI (open the Launchpad) or from the terminal, the same way you read the compute environment back in section 1.2:

```bash
tw pipelines list
```

`rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER` is there, with no run. Now apply again:
````

```bash
terraform apply -var="username=$WORKSHOP_USER" -var="workspace_id=<ID>" -var="compute_env_id=<CE_ID>"
```

```console
No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.

> ```

Reviewer: Collapsible output, matching the house style.

````suggestion
??? success "Command output"

    ```console
    No changes. Your infrastructure matches the configuration.
    ```
````

That is the difference. `tw` and `seqerakit` errored on the second run because they perform an action every time. Terraform manages whether the pipeline **exists**: it is already there, so there is nothing to do. Apply ten times, still one pipeline. This is what keeps you from accumulating competing, half-duplicated resources in a shared workspace. To remove the pipeline, `terraform apply -destroy` with the same vars.

**Update in place.** Terraform does more than create-or-skip; it reconciles the pipeline to whatever the config says. The config tracks the `master` branch, which moves as the pipeline gets new commits. Pin it to a fixed release tag instead, so every launch runs the same code. Edit one line: in `main.tf`, line 35 of the `launch` block, change the revision from the `master` branch to the `v2.4` release tag.

=== "After"

>     ```hcl title="main.tf" hl_lines="4" linenums="32"

Reviewer: `title="main.tf"` is ambiguous (there are two `main.tf` files in this quest). Point at the pipeline one.

````suggestion
    ```hcl title="terraform/pipeline/main.tf" hl_lines="4" linenums="32"
````

      launch = {
        pipeline = "https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf"
        # The master branch moves; pin a release tag (e.g. v2.4) for reproducible launches.
        revision       = "v2.4"
        compute_env_id = var.compute_env_id
        work_dir       = var.work_dir
      }
    ```

=== "Before"

>     ```hcl title="main.tf" hl_lines="4" linenums="32"

Reviewer: ````suggestion
    ```hcl title="terraform/pipeline/main.tf" hl_lines="4" linenums="32"
````

      launch = {
        pipeline = "https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf"
        # The master branch moves; pin a release tag (e.g. v2.4) for reproducible launches.
        revision       = "master"
        compute_env_id = var.compute_env_id
        work_dir       = var.work_dir
      }
    ```

Then apply:

```console
Terraform will perform the following actions:

  # seqera_pipeline.rnaseq_nf will be updated in-place
  ~ resource "seqera_pipeline" "rnaseq_nf" {
      ~ launch = {
          ~ revision = "master" -> "v2.4"
            # (4 unchanged attributes hidden)
        }
    }

Plan: 0 to add, 1 to change, 0 to destroy.

> ```

Reviewer: Collapsible output, matching the house style.

````suggestion
??? success "Command output"

    ```console
    Terraform will perform the following actions:

      # seqera_pipeline.rnaseq_nf will be updated in-place
      ~ resource "seqera_pipeline" "rnaseq_nf" {
          ~ launch = {
              ~ revision = "master" -> "v2.4"
                # (4 unchanged attributes hidden)
            }
        }

    Plan: 0 to add, 1 to change, 0 to destroy.
    ```
````

---

## 3. Launch: run a pipeline

**Requires:** Launch role and a token with that role, plus a pipeline on the Launchpad (added by a Maintainer in section 2). Launch can only run things; it cannot create or modify compute environments, pipelines, or Actions.

Everything in this section runs the pipeline the Maintainer already configured. None of it changes the pipeline; launching is an action, not a state.

### 3.1. Use the GUI

Open the **Launchpad**, select `rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER`, and click **Launch**. The compute environment, revision, and work directory are already filled in by the Maintainer, so a Launch user just clicks the button. Submit it and the run appears under **Runs**.

### 3.2. Use the `tw` CLI

```bash
tw launch rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER
```

It should show something like:

```console
  Workflow 2ZXaU1AzEn7Onk submitted at [Organization / Workspace] workspace.

    https://cloud.seqera.io/orgs/Organization/workspaces/Workspace/watch/2ZXaU1AzEn7Onk

> ```

Reviewer: Collapsible output, matching the house style.

````suggestion
??? success "Command output"

    ```console
      Workflow 2ZXaU1AzEn7Onk submitted at [Organization / Workspace] workspace.

        https://cloud.seqera.io/orgs/Organization/workspaces/Workspace/watch/2ZXaU1AzEn7Onk
    ```
````

You can monitor the run by clicking the provided URL.

!!! note "Using a params file"

    If you wish to provide parameters to the pipeline, you can do so with the `--params-file` flag.

### 3.3. Use `seqerakit`

`seqerakit` launches a pipeline that already exists on the Launchpad, filling in the `tw launch` command from `seqerakit/launch-rnaseq.yml`. `WORKSHOP_USER` is set from section 0; set the compute environment name, dry run first, then launch:

```bash
cd /workspaces/training/side-quests/platform_automation/seqerakit
export COMPUTE_ENVIRONMENT=<compute environment name>

seqerakit launch-rnaseq.yml --dryrun   # prints the tw command, changes nothing
seqerakit launch-rnaseq.yml            # launches for real
```

The dry run shows the underlying `tw` command. Run it twice and you get two runs. That is the imperative model: do the thing, now.

> One advantage of using Seqerakit is the YAML forms a template of actions to perform. Because of this we can do two more things: firstly, we can save it and re-use it later. Secondly, we can launch the same pipeline several times by adding more launch blocks to the YAML file. This is useful if you want to launch the same pipeline with different parameters or on different compute environments. Let's try and launch the pipeline now with

Reviewer: `Seqerakit` should be `` `seqerakit` `` (lowercase, backticked) to match the rest of the doc, and this is a long run-on. Suggest splitting.

---

## Summary

You drove the Seqera Platform programmatically across three roles, each handing an artifact to the next: Admin builds the compute environment and owns the cloud, Maintain adds pipelines and Launch triggers a run.

### Key patterns

- **Everything is one API.** The GUI, Terraform, `tw`, and `seqerakit` all call the same Platform API. Anything you can click, you can automate.
- **Use the right tool.** Terraform manages resources as state: what should exist, where. `tw` and `seqerakit` act on the Platform imperatively: they do the thing, now.

|              | Terraform     | `seqerakit` / `tw` / Action |
| ------------ | ------------- | --------------------------- |
| Manages      | existence     | actions                     |
| Run twice    | no-op         | two runs                    |
| Mental model | desired state | do the thing, now           |

- **Roles stratify what each token can do.** A Maintain token defines pipelines and Actions; a Launch token can only trigger an Action and nothing else. The Action is the safe handoff from maintainers to launchers (and to automation).

## What's next?

> - The AI half of the workshop is the [Building with Seqera AI (CoScientist)](../co_scientist/index.md) side quest. It uses the same `rnaseq-nf` pipeline and API endpoints, but drives them via AI agents.

Reviewer: Heads up that this relative link 404s until #963 merges (the PR description notes it). If #968 can merge first, consider temporarily pointing at the side-quests index, or gating merge order, so `master` never ships a broken link.

Everything the web UI does, it does by calling the Platform API. So everything is automatable: with the API, Terraform, and the CLI you can manage compute environments, pipelines, and runs as code, with no clicking. This side quest walks that programmatic surface from the most privileged role to the least.

### Learning goals

In this side quest, we'll drive the Platform across three workspace roles of decreasing permission: **Admin**, **Maintain**, and **Launch**. Each role does one job and hands an artifact to the next. You'll learn how to:

- Create a compute environment two ways, with increasing control over the cloud: the UI (Batch Forge) and Terraform
- Add a pipeline to the Launchpad declaratively with Terraform, and see idempotency
- Launch a pipeline using the GUI, CLI and `seqerakit`.
- Tell declarative existence (Terraform) apart from imperative actions (the UI, `seqerakit`, `tw`) and learn when to use each

### Prerequisites

Before taking on this side quest, you should:

> - Have a Seqera Platform account on Seqera Cloud (`https://cloud.seqera.io`), or an Enterprise install

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Have a Seqera Platform account on Seqera Cloud [https://cloud.seqera.io](`https://cloud.seqera.io`), or an Enterprise install
```

- Be a member of a workspace with a role: Admin, Maintain, or Launch

> - Have credentials for your cloud provider already added to that workspace (not covered here)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Have credentials for your cloud provider already added to that workspace (not covered here, see [credentials overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-cloud/credentials/overview))
```

> - Ideally, a GitHub access token added too, to avoid GitHub rate limits

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Ideally, GitHub credentials are added to your workspace. This is optional, but it would help prevent incidents caused by GitHub rate limits.
```

- Be comfortable with the command line and basic Nextflow concepts

> New to running pipelines on Seqera at all? Start with the gentler "Run pipelines on Seqera" module in the [Nextflow Triathlon](https://training.nextflow.io/) (sign up, launch in the UI, the `tw` CLI). This side quest is the automation layer on top of it: roles, Terraform, `seqerakit`, and Actions.

Reviewer 2: I cannot fin the triathlon in this link atm

### Move into the project directory

The Codespace terminal opens at the repository root (`/workspaces/training`). All the assets for this side quest live under `side-quests/platform_automation/`, so move there now:

```bash
cd /workspaces/training/side-quests/platform_automation
```

Focus VSCode on this directory so the file explorer shows the assets you'll edit:

```bash
code .
```

### Review the materials

The directory holds the Terraform and `seqerakit` configurations for each role. Each section below tells you which subdirectory to `cd` into:

??? abstract "Directory contents"

    ```console
    .
    ├── terraform
    │   ├── compute-env        # section 1 (Admin): provision the cloud + compute environment
    │   │   ├── main.tf
    │   │   ├── variables.tf
    │   │   └── terraform.tfvars.example
    │   └── pipeline           # section 2 (Maintain): add a pipeline to the Launchpad
    │       ├── main.tf
    │       ├── variables.tf
    │       └── terraform.tfvars.example
    └── seqerakit              # sections 2 & 3: add and launch a pipeline
        ├── add-rnaseq.yml
        ├── launch-rnaseq.yml
        └── launch-rnaseq-multiple.yml

>     ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```

We'll cover the content of these files in a moment.
```

> ### Create an access token

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Log in to Platform and go to the organisation and workspaces your trainer directs you to

.... or something

### Create an access token
```

We authenticate to the Platform to tell it who we are. That is what grants the permissions of our role. Seqera uses a **personal access token**: a bearer token you create once and send with every API call, in an `Authorization: Bearer <token>` header. The token carries your identity and role, so the Platform knows who you are and what you can do. Anyone with the token can act as you, so keep it secret. In this training we save it as an environment variable.

1. In the Platform, open the user menu (top right) and choose **Your tokens**.
2. Click **Add token**, name it (e.g. `platform-automation`), and click **Add**.
3. Copy the token now. The Platform shows it only once.
4. In the Codespace terminal, export it under both names:

```bash

> export TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN=<paste-token>

Reviewer: we should probably have them store this somewhere persistent. I just lost mine because I had to resume my codespace and the env wasn't preserved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
echo <paste token> > token.txt
export TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN=$(cat token.txt)
```

Reviewer: same for all the env stuff

> export SEQERA_ACCESS_TOKEN=$TOWER_ACCESS_TOKEN

Reviewer: Why both?

```

Terraform, `tw`, and `seqerakit` all read the token from these variables. Check it worked:

```bash
tw info
```

This prints the API endpoint and the authenticated user. If it errors, the token is wrong or not exported.

!!! warning

    This only exists in a single terminal session, if you open a new terminal you will need to export them again.

> For Seqera Enterprise, also set `SEQERA_API_URL` (and the `server_url` Terraform variable) to your install's API URL. Everything else is identical.

Reviewer: Example? How do folks find that?

The work is split by role, from most to least privileged. Start at the highest tier your access allows:

| Tier                                                    | Role          | Can change                               | Produces             |
| ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------- | ---------------------------------------- | -------------------- |
| [Admin](#1-admin-compute-environments-and-cloud)        | Owner / Admin | Compute environments and cloud resources | a `compute_env_id`   |
| [Maintain](#2-maintain-add-a-pipeline-to-the-launchpad) | Maintain      | Pipelines on the Launchpad               | a Launchpad pipeline |
| [Launch](#3-launch-run-a-pipeline)                      | Launch        | Nothing; can only run                    | pipeline runs        |

Admin users create compute environments and assign roles to everyone else. If you only have Maintain, an Admin on your team hands you a `compute_env_id`; start at section 2. If you only have Launch, they hand you a Launchpad pipeline (and optionally an Action) to run; start at section 3. Each section opens with what it requires.

---

## 1. Admin: compute environments and cloud

> **Requires:** Owner or Admin role, and permissions in the cloud environment. If you are using a Cloud provider, authenticate with them first via their CLI.

Reviewer: We're skipping over credentials here. Don't we want to 1) ensure that trainers do that in advance, so that keys are in place and 2) have the users go look at the creds, understand what they are?

> **Requires:** Owner or Admin role, and permissions in the cloud environment. If you are using a Cloud provider, authenticate with them first via their CLI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Requires:** Owner or Admin role, and permissions in the cloud environment. If you are using a Cloud provider, authenticate with them first via their CLI (e.g. `aws sso login`).
```

The same compute environment can be created with increasing control over the cloud. We build it two ways.

### 1.1. Click-ops a compute environment with Batch Forge

Batch Forge is the hands-off option: the Platform reaches into your cloud and creates the resources for you. Most convenient, least control.

In the side bar, open **Compute Environments** and click **Create compute environment**. Give it a name, pick your cloud platform, and select the credentials for that cloud. The rest of the form differs by provider; recommended settings:

**AWS**

- Region
- Work directory (S3 bucket)
- Wave, Fusion, Fast Instance should all be enabled
- Config mode should be Batch Forge
- Provisioning model should be Spot, using Spot instances for nodes which run Nextflow tasks.

**Azure**

> 

Reviewer: Lots of ways this can go wrong- should we encourage some sensible values?

- For the head pool VM type, select a VM you have sufficient quota for. Standard_D2s_v3 (2 CPUs) is a good starting choice.
- Set the head pool VM count to 1. The head pool runs a single Nextflow head job; it does not need more.
- For the worker pool, select a VM type you have sufficient quota for. Standard_D4s_v3 (4 CPUs) is a good starting choice.
- Set the worker pool VM count to 4
- Leave autoscaling enabled for both pools

Leave the other settings at their defaults. Keep **Dispose resources** enabled so the pool is torn down when you delete the compute environment. Click **Add** in the top right.

Watch your cloud console and you will see Forge create the resources: an identity and roles for Nextflow (access to blob storage and the Batch service), a more limited role for the worker tasks (storage only), the pools, and their networking. Many moving parts, all handled for you.

That convenience is the trade-off: Forge owns those resources and gives you little control. A lab that already runs on managed infrastructure wants the opposite, to describe the resources itself and wire the Platform to them. That is the Terraform path.

> 

Reviewer: For our current example workspace:

```
Unable to connect - java.net.UnknownHostException: seqeralabs.westeurope.batch.azure.com: Name or service not known
```

```bash
tw compute-envs list
```

Now export its full configuration to a file.
Use the name you gave it in 1.1:

```bash
tw compute-envs export forge-ce.json --name="<the name you gave it in 1.1>"
```

`tw` reads the workspace from `TOWER_WORKSPACE_ID` (set in section 0), so no `--workspace` flag is needed.
The file `forge-ce.json` is the compute environment as the API stores it:

```json title="forge-ce.json"
{
  "computeEnv": {
    "name": "azure-batch",
    "platform": "azure-batch",
    "config": {
      "workDir": "az://work",
      "region": "eastus",
      "waveEnabled": true,
      "fusion2Enabled": true,
      "forge": {
        "headPool": {
          "vmType": "Standard_D2s_v3",
          "vmCount": 1,
          "autoScale": true
        },
        "workerPool": {
          "vmType": "Standard_D4s_v3",
          "vmCount": 4,
          "autoScale": true
        },
        "disposeOnDeletion": true
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The `forge` block is exactly what the checkboxes set in 1.1. Its presence is what tells the Platform to create and scale the pools for you. In the next section, the absence of this block is what makes the Terraform compute environment manual.

> Close the loop: import the file to recreate the compute environment, with nothing retyped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file can be used to recreate the compute environment, with nothing retyped.
```

```bash
tw compute-envs import forge-ce.json --name="azure-batch-copy" --credentials="<your-azure-credentials-name>"
```

### 1.3. Provision the cloud with Terraform

Terraform manages cloud resources declaratively: you describe what should exist and Terraform makes it so. It does not run your work; it only creates the compute environment. `side-quests/platform_automation/terraform/compute-env/` does it in a single `main.tf`, two providers in one apply:

- data sources: the existing Batch account and the Azure credentials already
  stored in the Platform, referenced, not created.
- `azurerm`: creates a head pool and a worker pool on that account.
- `seqera`: creates the compute environment pointing at those pools.

The manual marker: `head_pool` is set to the pool Terraform just made and there is **no `forge` block**. That one difference is what makes the compute environment manual instead of Forge. `nextflow_config` routes tasks to the worker pool.

> Let's walk the key blocks of `terraform/compute-env/main.tf`.

Reviewer: Too much 'just talking' about tf below, I'd hate to teach that and just waffle on about terraform code blocks for 5 mins straight. We should have folks running pieces more, e.g. do the 'init' up front.

```terraform
resource "seqera_compute_env" "main" {
  workspace_id = var.workspace_id

  compute_env = {
    name           = "azure-batch-manual"
    description    = "Azure Batch CE on Terraform-managed pools"
    platform       = "azure-batch"
    credentials_id = local.azure_credentials_id

    config = {
      azure_batch = {
        region          = var.region
        work_dir        = var.work_dir
        head_pool       = azurerm_batch_pool.head.name
        enable_wave     = true
        enable_fusion   = true
        nextflow_config = "process.queue = '${azurerm_batch_pool.worker.name}'\n"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The last block is the output the next tier needs:

```terraform
output "compute_env_id" {
  value = seqera_compute_env.main.compute_env_id
}
```

Terraform reads those references and works out the order itself: pools first, then the compute environment that depends on them.

Now, we can run Terraform to apply these changes.

```bash
# you may need to log in to the cloud provider with `az login`
terraform init

> terraform apply

Reviewer: This asks the user for a whole bunch of stuff we haven't told them how to find out.

```

After you run `terraform apply`, it will ask you to fill in the details defined in `variables.tf`

!!! tip "Tearing it down"

    You can save them as a .tfvars file and Terraform will read them automatically, so you don't have to type them each time. See `terraform.tfvars.example` for the full variable reference.
    Alternatively, you can save them as an environment variable preceded by `TF_VAR_`, for example `TF_VAR_subscription_id=00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000`.

Terraform will show you a preview, if it looks accurate, type `yes` to apply the changes. It will create the pools and the compute environment, and print the `compute_env_id` you hand to the Maintain tier.

### 1.4. See both sides

The compute environment now exists in two places, and as an Admin with cloud access you can see both.

On the Platform side, read the ID Terraform produced:

```bash
terraform output compute_env_id
```

> On the Azure side, open the Batch account in the portal. You will see the head and worker pools Terraform created, sitting idle with no jobs yet. Once you launch a pipeline (sections 2 and 3), jobs and tasks stack onto these pools, and you can drill into a task's logs and exit code. That is the whole point of the Admin tier: the Platform submits to Azure Batch, and Azure Batch runs the work. Maintain- and Launch-role users see only the compute environment in the workspace, not the cloud behind it.

Reviewer: Does this make sense to include? Are we ever going to give trainees access to cloud consoles?

---

## 2. Maintain: add a pipeline to the Launchpad

**Requires:** Maintain role, and a `compute_env_id` (from section 1 or an Admin on your team) plus the numeric `workspace_id`. Maintain manages pipelines, not compute environments. That split is deliberate: Admin owns the compute environment, you own your pipelines.

You add the same pipeline, `rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER`, four ways. The first three are imperative, you run a command and it acts. The last, Terraform, is declarative. Watch what happens when you run each one twice.

### 2.1. Add a pipeline via the UI

In the workspace, open the **Launchpad** and click **Add pipeline**. Fill in the form:

- **Name**: `rnaseq-nf-` followed by your handle, e.g. `rnaseq-nf-ada` (the handle you exported as `WORKSHOP_USER` in section 0).
- **Compute environment**: the one from section 1, e.g. `azure-batch-manual`.
- **Pipeline to launch**: `https://github.com/nextflow-io/rnaseq-nf`.
- **Revision**: `master`.
- **Work directory**: your Azure Blob work dir, e.g. `az://work`.

Click **Add**. The pipeline appears on the Launchpad with no run started. Adding a pipeline only saves a launch configuration; it does not run anything.

> To remove from the workspace, you can click the hamburger menu on the top right and click **Delete**.

Reviewer: hamburger?

### 2.2. Add a pipeline via `tw`

The CLI does the same thing in one command:

```bash
tw pipelines add \
  --name="rnaseq-nf-$WORKSHOP_USER" \

>   --compute-env="azure-batch-manual" \

Reviewer: Will we guarantee 'azure-batch-manual'? What to do if we're not doing 'admin'?
